ADR: priorities of Infection (#3425)
infection/infection: adr/0014-priorities.md

Urgency cannot promote a change into work that we want. It reorders the queue; it does not turn
a type 4 change into required work, and "this cleanup is urgent for me" is not urgency.

The two axes together give the review order:

|                      | Urgent  | High    | Medium  | Low     |
|----------------------|---------|---------|---------|---------|
| Bug                  | Now     | Next    | Queued  | Queued  |
| Feature              | Next    | Queued  | Queued  | Backlog |
| Enabling Refactoring | Queued  | Queued  | Backlog | Backlog |
| Other                | Backlog | Backlog | Backlog | Backlog |

- **Now** - we interrupt other work, and the fix goes out as soon as possible.
- **Next** - it goes to the top of its type, ahead of everything queued.
- **Queued** - normal order inside its type.
- **Backlog** - we review it when nothing above it competes for the same hours.

Two properties of this table are deliberate. The `Bug` row never falls below `Queued`, because
every reported bug earns a review even when it is minor. The `Other` row is flat, because urgency
reorders work but does not make a type 4 change into work that the project needs.

> 

Reviewer: Follow up of https://github.com/infection/infection/pull/3425#discussion_r3668732632

```suggestion

Priority determines which work receives attention first. It does not prescribe the same review
depth for every change. Review effort is proportional to the change's exposure: who it affects,
whether its correctness has objective boundaries, how easily it can be reverted, and who will
maintain it. A small change to mutation generation may need substantial review because an error
can silently affect users. A change confined to contributor tooling, guarded by PHPUnit or
static-analysis failures, or otherwise isolated from shipped behaviour may need much less.

Low-exposure work may therefore land opportunistically, including type 4 work, when its review
does not materially delay higher-priority work. Review capacity is not fully interchangeable:
work performed and maintained by someone with a particular need or area of expertise does not
necessarily displace a bug fix that requires another maintainer. "Does not compete" refers to
the implementation and review attention actually needed by higher-priority work, not merely to
the presence of such work in the queue.

```

Author: applied

Every pull request states its type, and the author is the one who states it. Type 3 also names
and links the issue that the refactoring unblocks, because the type alone does not tell the
reviewer what the change brings. A refactoring that cannot name that issue is type 4, and we
normally decline or postpone it because it is not a priority for maintainers' review. Urgency is for
maintainers to judge, not for the author to declare.

A rationale must be verifiable by the reviewer: a reproduced defect, a named capability, a
measured performance figure, or an existing project convention such as an ADR. Personal taste
is not a rationale. "I prefer this shape", "this is more idiomatic", and "this is cleaner"
do not justify changing code that has worked for years. This applies to maintainers as
much as to first-time contributors.

> 

Reviewer: Follow up of https://github.com/infection/infection/pull/3425#discussion_r3668601552.

```suggestion

Readability work is not inherently without value. Difficult code imposes a recurring
comprehension cost on every future change and a refactoring can transfer that repeated cost
into a single reviewed change. Because readability is subjective, the proposal must make that
cost verifiable, for example through repeated misunderstandings, defects caused by the current
structure, disproportionate effort in recent changes or a substantial and demonstrable
reduction in complexity. Without that evidence, or a specific bug or feature that the
refactoring enables, it remains type 4 work and retains the corresponding priority.

```

Author: applied 1 paragraph below

The result is that reported bugs and accepted features wait behind changes that no user asked
for.

## Decision

We sort review work on two axes: the type of change, and its urgency. They answer different
questions, and mixing them is what makes a queue unreadable. This increases the review time.

There are four types of change. The type decides whether we accept the work at all, and gives
the default order in which maintainers review it.

1. **Bug.** Incorrect mutants, wrong MSI, crashes, regressions, data loss, and performance
   regressions. Compatibility fixes for supported PHP, PHPUnit and test-framework versions
   belong here.
2. **Feature.** User-facing capability that an issue describes and the maintainers have accepted.
3. **Enabling Refactoring.** A structural change that **is a precondition for a specific fix or
   feature that is impractical to implement today**. The pull request must name and link that
   fix or feature.
4. **Other.** Everything else: developer tooling, style sweeps, renames, reorganisation, new
   static-analysis rules, and comparable work. We accept these only when they do not compete
   with work of types 1 to 3.

> Urgency is the second axis, and it varies inside every type. Two bug fixes are not equally

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Urgency is the second independent axis. Two bug fixes are not equally
```
I still want to edit this heavy to remove ai-isms.

Author: applied

urgent: a crash or a wrong MSI in a common configuration comes before a rare edge case that has
a workaround. A maintainer may therefore review a very urgent item ahead of a whole type, and
say in the pull request why it goes first.

Urgency cannot promote a change into work that we want. It reorders the queue; it does not turn

> a type 4 change into required work, and "this cleanup is urgent for me" is not urgency.

Reviewer 2: I feel like this paragraphs just restates the obvious; so that's another editing angle.

Author: ok, removed

# Prioritise bug fixes, features, and only then enabling refactoring

## Context

Maintainers review Infection in their own time. Review capacity, not the number of PRs, sets how
much the project can absorb, and every pull request spends part of that capacity.

A large number of pull requests neither fix a reported bug nor add a requested feature. They

> often restructure code that already works, or add tooling that no current task needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
often restructure code, or add tooling that no current task needs.
```

(restructuring code that does not work does not make any sense, or I don't know what that would mean)

> Such a change is harder to review than a bug fix. A bug fix carries its own purpose: the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Such a change is harder to review than a bug fix. A bug fix has a purpose: the
```

> linked issue says what was wrong. A restructuring usually does not, so the reviewer has to work

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
linked issue identifies a problem. A restructuring usually does not, so the reviewer has to work
```

out why it is proposed at all, and whether it brings any bug fix or feature closer. That answer
is frequently missing from the pull request, and asking for it costs more time than reading the

> diff.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is frequently missing from the pull request, and the answer to this question is more important than the diff.
```

The two axes together give the review order:

|                      | Urgent  | High    | Medium  | Low     |
|----------------------|---------|---------|---------|---------|
| Bug                  | Now     | Next    | Queued  | Queued  |
| Feature              | Next    | Queued  | Queued  | Backlog |
| Enabling Refactoring | Queued  | Queued  | Backlog | Backlog |
| Other                | Backlog | Backlog | Backlog | Backlog |

- **Now** - we interrupt other work, and the fix goes out as soon as possible.
- **Next** - it goes to the top of its type, ahead of everything queued.
- **Queued** - normal order inside its type.
- **Backlog** - we review it when nothing above it competes for the same hours.

Two properties of this table are deliberate. The `Bug` row never falls below `Queued`, because
every reported bug earns a review even when it is minor. The `Other` row is flat, because urgency
reorders work but does not make a type 4 change into work that the project needs.

Every pull request states its type, and the author is the one who states it. Type 3 also names
and links the issue that the refactoring unblocks, because the type alone does not tell the

> reviewer what the change buys. A refactoring that cannot name that issue is type 4, and we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
reviewer what the change brings. A refactoring that cannot name that issue is type 4, and we
```
?

> normally decline or postpone it - it is not a priority for maintainers' review. Urgency is for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
normally decline or postpone it because it is not a priority for maintainers' review. Urgency is for
```
?

maintainers to judge, not for the author to declare.

A rationale must be verifiable by the reviewer: a reproduced defect, a named capability, a

> measured performance figure, or an existing project convention such as an ADR. Personal taste

Reviewer: whilst I get the sentiment, I do have one point to raise there.

This is the cost of the readability of the code. Code ages, practices evolves, tooling evolves, quality of the reviews differs. This can result in a situation where the code is perfectly working, it does its job, but a change may require its understanding, and understanding it may be overly complicated.

I am not saying one should look for a piece of code that may be a bit obfuscated to change it for the sake of it, but equally if an obfuscated piece of code can be made much simpler (for various reasons – e.g. a new tool/dependency available making easier), there is value (IMO) in transferring this cost of learning into a change that makes it easier for new readers.

Obviously this is prone to opinions, what is readable is very often quite subjective or not in the interest of the maintainers and main contributors, or the gains are too marginal to justify it. But I felt the need to counter a bit the "it just makes it cleaner so there is no value in it".

Author: yeah, complex topic :) I got your point. But is there anything in particular you want to rephrase here?

Reviewer: Suggestion: https://github.com/infection/infection/pull/3425#discussion_r3672276025

is not a rationale. "I prefer this shape", "this is more idiomatic", and "this is cleaner"
do not justify changing code that has worked for years. This applies to maintainers as
much as to first-time contributors.

Infection is not a playground. Its users are other maintainers who trust its results, so a
change to working code answers to their needs, not to our curiosity about a technique. Try
ideas out in a fork, and bring back the ones that a bug or a feature needs.

> ## Consequences

Reviewer: An aspect missing here (in this ADR, not sure what section exactly) IMO is the level of importance some changes. I am thinking of the recent changes done in regards to the AutoReview for example.

Indeed, the latter were about improving the existing test harnesses we have and enforcing more conventions, either explicitly stated via an ADR, or established through existing code (part of that work was sometimes adding an ADR for it).

Whilst AI shifts the load and is part of the discussion, in absolute it's not the important factor either. The point is more: there may be a lot of work there, but it has a very limited impact (maintainers and contributors), with well established boundaries (PHPStan violations or failing PHPUnit tests), and the implementation is, ultimately, not important – within reason.* This sort of work does not deserve the same level of attention than the rest, but by its nature if the assumption is that we are always under capacity, then such work can never be done, which I do not think is the correct thing to do either.

Another example is the Docker Sandbox: I experienced it, it was game changer for me personally, but if I had to wait for review on it – especially at a time where I had little experience with it and would have trouble to justify any priotization of it over anything else, then by this ADR this would have never been done. It has since then proved extremely valuable for me and if it was not already in Infection that would 100% be the very first thing I would be doing, and if that was not committed I would have to create another repo/script synchronized somewhere to be able to use it because it is that much of a necessity IMO. And if someone else is trying it and convinced this is absolutely useless and should be removed, it can be discussed and either kept or removed (after the fact).

Those are two examples, but the essence is: depending of the impact and who is affected, I feel the current document misses a bit of nuance in regards to when some changes can land and how much consideration/careful attention/review they need.

*: Obviously no one wants a giant pile of convoluted obfuscated gibberish to maintain.

Author: while I agree that some kind of changes requires less attention (but it's hard to achieve this point), there are some statements that I disagree with:

> but if I had to wait for review on it – especially at a time where I had little experience with it and would have trouble to justify any priotization of it over anything else, then by this ADR this would have never been done.

yea, this would have never been done and this is fine IMO. If one want to play with something, expecially with no experience - do it without committing. If it's valuable - then there shouldn't be any problem to justify and introduce it to the codebase.

> and if that was not committed I would have to create another repo/script synchronized somewhere to be able to use it because it is that much of a necessity IMO

didn't get this. What's the problem to add all the files to a folder that is git-ignored?

----

> Those are two examples, but the essence is: depending of the impact and who is affected, I feel the current document misses a bit of nuance in regards to when some changes can land and how much consideration/careful attention/review they need.

would you mind suggest changes by `diff` feature or just by putting some text that you think should be added/updated?

Reviewer: >What's the problem to add all the files to a folder that is git-ignored?

As soon as you change of machine this would be a problem, which is the case for me at least. I regularly have to juggle between 1-3 machines.

Edit: kinda get why it appears here but at the same time quite weird...

Reviewer: >https://github.com/infection/infection/pull/3425#discussion_r3672331540

Done in https://github.com/infection/infection/pull/3425#discussion_r3672331540

- Maintainers may close a type 4 pull request without a detailed review, and must say why.
  Closing judges the type of change, not the contributor or the quality of the code.
- An urgent bug fix can go out before a queue of older bug fixes, because the recorded urgency
  puts it there.
- Some genuinely good cleanup will not be merged, or will wait a long time. We accept that
  cost, because the alternative spends review capacity that bug fixes need.

## Enforcement

Review only. Nothing here is automated, because no tool can decide whether a change is required.

The author states the type. A maintainer confirms it before an in-depth review, and corrects it
when the author has it wrong, which is expected for `Enabling Refactoring`. Urgency is set by a
maintainer.

Both values are recorded where every maintainer can see them, so that the order in the table is
visible instead of remembered, and so that the queue can be read in one place. The record covers
issues as well as pull requests, because a proposal that waits for a decision, an RFC for
example, spends the same review capacity as a diff.

> ### Mapping onto GitHub

Author: actually, this is what I started with before writing ADR - I wanted to have some board where we can prioritize "what to look at next" from review point of view. To have some order between ~100 waiting-for-review issues/PRs

It turns out, this is not easy. Issues on GH has native Type and Priority fields. But PRs don't. At the same time, it's possible to create our custom single-value dropdowns fields and use them for both Issues and PRs - that's yet to be decided.

I think this section can be removed from this ADR, but leaving it here just to show you what I started with.

Reviewer: >It turns out, this is not easy. Issues on GH has native Type and Priority fields. But PRs don't.

Yes... It's a policy they have on a number of things, it's the same with issue types and completion progress among other things...

I don't think it's worth to add this section to this ADR as long as it's a work in progress to figure out a solution that works especially if trying it out or enforcing it is not something visible from the code (i.e. it's easy to update a rule without updating this ADR, making it outdated).

That said, I'd be happy to see any attempt to improve the Development Board. I feel lonely using it, so I barely do 😅

Author: makes sense. Removed
